Title: Learning Sparse Approximate Inverse Preconditioners for Conjugate Gradient Solvers on GPUs
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.27517v1
Published: 2025-10-31 14:42:48+00:00
----------------------------------------
The conjugate gradient solver (CG) is a prevalent method for solving symmetric and positive definite linear systems Ax=b, where effective preconditioners are crucial for fast convergence. Traditional preconditioners rely on prescribed algorithms to offer rigorous theoretical guarantees, while limiting their ability to exploit optimization from data. Existing learning-based methods often utilize Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) to improve the performance and speed up the construction. However, their reliance on incomplete factorization leads to significant challenges: the associated triangular solve hinders GPU parallelization in practice, and introduces long-range dependencies which are difficult for GNNs to model. To address these issues, we propose a learning-based method to generate GPU-friendly preconditioners, particularly using GNNs to construct Sparse Approximate Inverse (SPAI) preconditioners, which avoids triangular solves and requires only two matrix-vector products at each CG step. The locality of matrix-vector product is compatible with the local propagation mechanism of GNNs. The flexibility of GNNs also allows our approach to be applied in a wide range of scenarios. Furthermore, we introduce a statistics-based scale-invariant loss function. Its design matches CG's property that the convergence rate depends on the condition number, rather than the absolute scale of A, leading to improved performance of the learned preconditioner. Evaluations on three PDE-derived datasets and one synthetic dataset demonstrate that our method outperforms standard preconditioners (Diagonal, IC, and traditional SPAI) and previous learning-based preconditioners on GPUs. We reduce solution time on GPUs by 40%-53% (68%-113% faster), along with better condition numbers and superior generalization performance. Source code available at https://github.com/Adversarr/LearningSparsePreconditioner4GPU