Title: Self-Interest and Systemic Benefits: Emergence of Collective Rationality in Mixed Autonomy Traffic Through Deep Reinforcement Learning
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2511.04883v1
Published: 2025-11-07 00:03:12+00:00
----------------------------------------
Autonomous vehicles (AVs) are expected to be commercially available in the near future, leading to mixed autonomy traffic consisting of both AVs and human-driven vehicles (HVs). Although numerous studies have shown that AVs can be deployed to benefit the overall traffic system performance by incorporating system-level goals into their decision making, it is not clear whether the benefits still exist when agents act out of self-interest -- a trait common to all driving agents, both human and autonomous. This study aims to understand whether self-interested AVs can bring benefits to all driving agents in mixed autonomy traffic systems. The research is centered on the concept of collective rationality (CR). This concept, originating from game theory and behavioral economics, means that driving agents may cooperate collectively even when pursuing individual interests. Our recent research has proven the existence of CR in an analytical game-theoretical model and empirically in mixed human-driven traffic. In this paper, we demonstrate that CR can be attained among driving agents trained using deep reinforcement learning (DRL) with a simple reward design. We examine the extent to which self-interested traffic agents can achieve CR without directly incorporating system-level objectives. Results show that CR consistently emerges in various scenarios, which indicates the robustness of this property. We also postulate a mechanism to explain the emergence of CR in the microscopic and dynamic environment and verify it based on simulation evidence. This research suggests the possibility of leveraging advanced learning methods (such as federated learning) to achieve collective cooperation among self-interested driving agents in mixed-autonomy systems.