Title: A Hybrid Physics-Driven Neural Network Force Field for Liquid Electrolytes
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2511.13294v1
Published: 2025-11-17 12:15:53+00:00
----------------------------------------
Electrolyte design plays an important role in the development of lithium-ion batteries and sodium-ion batteries. Battery electrolytes feature a large design space composed of different solvents, additives, and salts, which is difficult to explore experimentally. High-fidelity molecular simulation can accurately predict the bulk properties of electrolytes by employing accurate potential energy surfaces, thus guiding the molecule and formula engineering. At present, the overly simplified classic force fields rely heavily on experimental data for fine-tuning, thus its predictive power on microscopic level is under question. In contrast, the newly emerged machine learning interatomic potential (MLIP) can accurately reproduce the ab initio data, demonstrating excellent fitting ability. However, it is still haunted by problems such as low transferrability, insufficient stability in the prediction of bulk properties, and poor training cost scaling. Therefore, it cannot yet be used as a robust and universal tool for the exploration of electrolyte design space. In this work, we introduce a highly scalable and fully bottom-up force field construction strategy called PhyNEO-Electrolyte. It adopts a hybrid physics-driven and data-driven method that relies only on monomer and dimer EDA (energy deomposition analysis) data. With a careful separation of long/short-range and non-bonding/bonding interactions, we rigorously restore the long-range asymptotic behavior, which is critical in the description of electrolyte systems. Through this approach, we significantly improve the data efficiency of MLIP training, allowing us to achieve much larger chemical space coverage using much less data while retaining reliable quantitative prediction power in bulk phase calculations. PhyNEO-electrolyte thus serves as an important tool for future electrolyte optimization.