Title: TwinOR: Photorealistic Digital Twins of Dynamic Operating Rooms for Embodied AI Research
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2511.07412v1
Published: 2025-11-10 18:57:09+00:00
----------------------------------------
Developing embodied AI for intelligent surgical systems requires safe, controllable environments for continual learning and evaluation. However, safety regulations and operational constraints in operating rooms (ORs) limit embodied agents from freely perceiving and interacting in realistic settings. Digital twins provide high-fidelity, risk-free environments for exploration and training. How we may create photorealistic and dynamic digital representations of ORs that capture relevant spatial, visual, and behavioral complexity remains unclear. We introduce TwinOR, a framework for constructing photorealistic, dynamic digital twins of ORs for embodied AI research. The system reconstructs static geometry from pre-scan videos and continuously models human and equipment motion through multi-view perception of OR activities. The static and dynamic components are fused into an immersive 3D environment that supports controllable simulation and embodied exploration. The proposed framework reconstructs complete OR geometry with centimeter level accuracy while preserving dynamic interaction across surgical workflows, enabling realistic renderings and a virtual playground for embodied AI systems. In our experiments, TwinOR simulates stereo and monocular sensor streams for geometry understanding and visual localization tasks. Models such as FoundationStereo and ORB-SLAM3 on TwinOR-synthesized data achieve performance within their reported accuracy on real indoor datasets, demonstrating that TwinOR provides sensor-level realism sufficient for perception and localization challenges. By establishing a real-to-sim pipeline for constructing dynamic, photorealistic digital twins of OR environments, TwinOR enables the safe, scalable, and data-efficient development and benchmarking of embodied AI, ultimately accelerating the deployment of embodied AI from sim-to-real.