Title: Strategic Opponent Modeling with Graph Neural Networks, Deep Reinforcement Learning and Probabilistic Topic Modeling
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2511.10501v2
Published: 2025-11-13 17:06:56+00:00
----------------------------------------
This paper provides a comprehensive review of mainly Graph Neural Networks, Deep Reinforcement Learning, and Probabilistic Topic Modeling methods with a focus on their potential incorporation in strategic multiagent settings. We draw interest in (i) Machine Learning methods currently utilized for uncovering unknown model structures adaptable to the task of strategic opponent modeling, and (ii) the integration of these methods with Game Theoretic concepts that avoid relying on assumptions often invalid in real-world scenarios, such as the Common Prior Assumption (CPA) and the Self-Interest Hypothesis (SIH). We analyze the ability to handle uncertainty and heterogeneity, two characteristics that are very common in real-world application cases, as well as scalability. As a potential answer to effectively modeling relationships and interactions in multiagent settings, we champion the use of Graph Neural Networks (GNN). Such approaches are designed to operate upon graph-structured data, and have been shown to be a very powerful tool for performing tasks such as node classification and link prediction. Next, we review the domain of Reinforcement Learning (RL), and in particular that of Multiagent Deep Reinforcement Learning (MADRL). Following, we describe existing relevant game theoretic solution concepts and consider properties such as fairness and stability. Our review comes complete with a note on the literature that utilizes PTM in domains other than that of document analysis and classification. The capability of PTM to estimate unknown underlying distributions can help with tackling heterogeneity and unknown agent beliefs. Finally, we identify certain open challenges specifically, the need to (i) fit non-stationary environments, (ii) balance the degrees of stability and adaptation, (iii) tackle uncertainty and heterogeneity, (iv) guarantee scalability and solution tractability.