Title: STAIR: Stability criterion for Time-windowed Assignment and Internal adversarial influence in Routing and decision-making
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2511.05715v1
Published: 2025-11-07 21:18:14+00:00
----------------------------------------
A major limitation of existing routing algorithms for multi-agent systems is that they are designed without considering the potential presence of adversarial agents in the decision-making loop, which could lead to severe performance degradation in real-life applications where adversarial agents may be present. We study autonomous pickup-and-delivery routing problems in which adversarial agents launch coordinated denial-of-service attacks by spoofing their locations. This deception causes the central scheduler to assign pickup requests to adversarial agents instead of cooperative agents. Adversarial agents then choose not to service the requests with the goal of disrupting the operation of the system, leading to delays, cancellations, and potential instability in the routing policy. Policy stability in routing problems is typically defined as the cost of the policy being uniformly bounded over time, and it has been studied through two different lenses: queuing theory and reinforcement learning (RL), which are not well suited for routing with adversaries. In this paper, we propose a new stability criterion, STAIR, which is easier to analyze than queuing-theory-based stability in adversarial settings. Furthermore, STAIR does not depend on a chosen discount factor as is the case in discounted RL stability. STAIR directly links stability to desired operational metrics, like a finite number of rejected requests. This characterization is particularly useful in adversarial settings as it provides a metric for monitoring the effect of adversaries in the operation of the system. Furthermore, we demonstrate STAIR's practical relevance through simulations on real-world San Francisco mobility-on-demand data. We also identify a phenomenon of degenerate stability that arises in the adversarial routing problem, and we introduce time-window constraints in the decision-making algorithm to mitigate it.