Title: Meta-SimGNN: Adaptive and Robust WiFi Localization Across Dynamic Configurations and Diverse Scenarios
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2511.14076v1
Published: 2025-11-18 03:08:57+00:00
----------------------------------------
To promote the practicality of deep learning-based localization, existing studies aim to address the issue of scenario dependence through meta-learning. However, these studies primarily focus on variations in environmental layouts while overlooking the impact of changes in device configurations, such as bandwidth, the number of access points (APs), and the number of antennas used. Unlike environmental changes, variations in device configurations affect the dimensionality of channel state information (CSI), thereby compromising neural network usability. To address this issue, we propose Meta-SimGNN, a novel WiFi localization system that integrates graph neural networks with meta-learning to improve localization generalization and robustness. First, we introduce a fine-grained CSI graph construction scheme, where each AP is treated as a graph node, allowing for adaptability to changes in the number of APs. To structure the features of each node, we propose an amplitude-phase fusion method and a feature extraction method. The former utilizes both amplitude and phase to construct CSI images, enhancing data reliability, while the latter extracts dimension-consistent features to address variations in bandwidth and the number of antennas. Second, a similarity-guided meta-learning strategy is developed to enhance adaptability in diverse scenarios. The initial model parameters for the fine-tuning stage are determined by comparing the similarity between the new scenario and historical scenarios, facilitating rapid adaptation of the model to the new localization scenario. Extensive experimental results over commodity WiFi devices in different scenarios show that Meta-SimGNN outperforms the baseline methods in terms of localization generalization and accuracy.