Title: High-Resolution Forest Mapping from L-Band Interferometric SAR Time Series using Deep Learning over Northern Spain
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2511.04362v1
Published: 2025-11-06 13:45:32+00:00
----------------------------------------
In this study, we examine the potential of high-resolution forest mapping using L-band interferometric time series datasets and deep learning modeling. Our SAR data are represented by a time series of nine ALOS-2 PALSAR-2 dual-pol SAR images acquired at near-zero spatial baseline over a study site in Asturias, Northern Spain. Reference data are collected using airborne laser scanning. We examine the performance of several candidate deep learning models from UNet-family with various combinations of input polarimetric and interferometric features. In addition to basic Vanilla UNet, attention reinforced UNet model with squeeze-excitation blocks (SeU-Net) and advanced UNet model with nested structure and skip pathways are used. Studied features include dual pol interferometric observables additionally incorporating model-based derived measures. Results show that adding model-based inverted InSAR features or InSAR coherence layers improves retrieval accuracy compared to using backscatter intensity only. Use of attention mechanisms and nested connection fusion provides better predictions than using Vanilla UNet or traditional machine learning methods. Forest height retrieval accuracies range between 3.1-3.8 m (R2 = 0.45--0.55) at 20 m resolution when only intensity data are used, and improve to less than 2.8 m when both intensity and interferometric coherence features are included. At 40 m and 60 m resolution, retrieval performance further improves, primarily due to higher SNR in both the intensity and interferometric layers. When using intensity at 60 m resolution, best achieved RMSE is 2.2 m, while when using all suitable input features the achieved error is 1.95 m. We recommend this hybrid approach for L-band SAR retrievals also suitable for NISAR and future ROSE-L missions.