Title: Examining Student and AI Generated Personalized Analogies in Introductory Physics
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2511.04290v1
Published: 2025-11-06 11:35:41+00:00
----------------------------------------
Comparing abstract concepts (such as electric circuits) with familiar ideas (plumbing systems) through analogies is central to practice and communication of physics. Contemporary research highlights self-generated analogies to better facilitate students' learning than the taught ones. "Spontaneous" and "self-generated" analogies represent the two ways through which students construct personalized analogies. However, facilitating them, particularly in large enrollment courses remains a challenge, and recent developments in generative artificial intelligence (AI) promise potential to address this issue. In this qualitative study, we analyze around 800 student responses in exploring the extent to which students spontaneously leverage analogies while explaining Morse potential curve in a language suitable for second graders and self-generate analogies in their preferred everyday contexts. We also compare the student-generated spontaneous analogies with AI-generated ones prompted by students. Lastly, we explore the themes associated with students' perceived ease and difficulty in generating analogies across both cases. Results highlight that unlike AI responses, student-generated spontaneous explanations seldom employ analogies. However, when explicitly asked to explain the behavior of the curve in terms of their everyday contexts, students employ diverse analogical contexts. A combination of disciplinary knowledge, agency to generate customized explanations, and personal attributes tend to influence students' perceived ease in generating explanations across the two cases. Implications of these results on the potential of AI to facilitate students' personalized analogical reasoning, and the role of analogies in making students notice gaps in their understanding are discussed.