Title: Disentangling Internal Tides from Balanced Motions with Deep Learning and Surface Field Synergy
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2511.03614v1
Published: 2025-11-05 16:32:03+00:00
----------------------------------------
A fundamental challenge in ocean dynamics is the disentanglement of balanced motions and internal waves. Extracting internal tidal (IT) imprints on surface data is a central part of this challenge. For IT extraction, traditional harmonic analysis fails in the presence of strong incoherence and poor temporal sampling, as is common in global satellite observations. The advent of new wide-swath satellites, which provide two-dimensional spatial coverage, allows IT extraction to be reformulated as an image translation problem. Building on recent work where we developed a deep learning approach to extract IT signatures from sea surface height (SSH) in an idealized turbulent simulation, we show here that a simpler and computationally cheaper algorithm can perform equally well if the learning rate is annealed during training. Using this new, convenient algorithm, we experiment with different combinations of input surface fields -- SSH, surface temperature, and surface velocity. All fields contribute synergistically to disentanglement, with surface velocity by far the most informative. These findings underscore the value of coordinated multi-platform observational campaigns and highlight the critical importance of surface velocity observations for separating balanced motions and internal waves. Additional insights into the behavior of deep learning algorithm emerge: both wave signature and scattering medium aids IT extraction, and to exploit large-scale information in the scattering medium, the algorithm must be highly non-local. Residual errors of our algorithm concentrate at small spatial scales near mode-2 tidal wavelengths, likely arising from artifacts introduced during data preparation (e.g., Doppler shifts) as well as imperfections in the deep learning architecture.