Title: Rapid Design and Fabrication of Body Conformable Surfaces with Kirigami Cutting and Machine Learning
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2511.13941v1
Published: 2025-11-17 21:49:06+00:00
----------------------------------------
By integrating the principles of kirigami cutting and data-driven modeling, this study aims to develop a personalized, rapid, and low-cost design and fabrication pipeline for creating body-conformable surfaces around the knee joint. The process begins with 3D scanning of the anterior knee surface of human subjects, followed by extracting the corresponding skin deformation between two joint angles in terms of longitudinal strain and Poisson's ratio. In parallel, a machine learning model is constructed using extensive simulation data from experimentally calibrated finite element analysis. This model employs Gaussian Process (GP) regression to relate kirigami cut lengths to the resulting longitudinal strain and Poisson's ratio. With an R2 score of 0.996, GP regression outperforms other models in predicting kirigami's large deformations. Finally, an inverse design approach based on the Covariance Matrix Adaptation Evolution Strategy (CMA-ES) is used to generate kirigami patch designs that replicate the in-plane skin deformation observed from the knee scans. This pipeline was applied to three human subjects, and the resulting kirigami knee patches were fabricated using rapid laser cutting, requiring only a business day from knee scanning to kirigami patch delivery. The low-cost, personalized kirigami patches successfully conformed to over 75 percent of the skin area across all subjects, establishing a foundation for a wide range of wearable devices. The study demonstrates this potential through an impact-resistant kirigami foam patch, which not only conforms to dynamic knee motion but also provides joint protection against impact. Finally, the proposed design and fabrication framework is generalizable and can be extended to other deforming body surfaces, enabling the creation of personalized wearables such as protective gear, breathable adhesives, and body-conformable electronics.