Title: A Brain Wave Encodes a Thousand Tokens: Modeling Inter-Cortical Neural Interactions for Effective EEG-based Emotion Recognition
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2511.13954v1
Published: 2025-11-17 22:27:12+00:00
----------------------------------------
Human emotions are difficult to convey through words and are often abstracted in the process; however, electroencephalogram (EEG) signals can offer a more direct lens into emotional brain activity. Recent studies show that deep learning models can process these signals to perform emotion recognition with high accuracy. However, many existing approaches overlook the dynamic interplay between distinct brain regions, which can be crucial to understanding how emotions unfold and evolve over time, potentially aiding in more accurate emotion recognition. To address this, we propose RBTransformer, a Transformer-based neural network architecture that models inter-cortical neural dynamics of the brain in latent space to better capture structured neural interactions for effective EEG-based emotion recognition. First, the EEG signals are converted into Band Differential Entropy (BDE) tokens, which are then passed through Electrode Identity embeddings to retain spatial provenance. These tokens are processed through successive inter-cortical multi-head attention blocks that construct an electrode x electrode attention matrix, allowing the model to learn the inter-cortical neural dependencies. The resulting features are then passed through a classification head to obtain the final prediction. We conducted extensive experiments, specifically under subject-dependent settings, on the SEED, DEAP, and DREAMER datasets, over all three dimensions, Valence, Arousal, and Dominance (for DEAP and DREAMER), under both binary and multi-class classification settings. The results demonstrate that the proposed RBTransformer outperforms all previous state-of-the-art methods across all three datasets, over all three dimensions under both classification settings. The source code is available at: https://github.com/nnilayy/RBTransformer.