Title: SpecAware: A Spectral-Content Aware Foundation Model for Unifying Multi-Sensor Learning in Hyperspectral Remote Sensing Mapping
URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.27219v1
Published: 2025-10-31 06:28:14+00:00
----------------------------------------
Hyperspectral imaging (HSI) is a vital tool for fine-grained land-use and land-cover (LULC) mapping. However, the inherent heterogeneity of HSI data has long posed a major barrier to developing generalized models via joint training. Although HSI foundation models have shown promise for different downstream tasks, the existing approaches typically overlook the critical guiding role of sensor meta-attributes, and struggle with multi-sensor training, limiting their transferability. To address these challenges, we propose SpecAware, which is a novel hyperspectral spectral-content aware foundation model for unifying multi-sensor learning for HSI mapping. We also constructed the Hyper-400K dataset to facilitate this research, which is a new large-scale, high-quality benchmark dataset with over 400k image patches from diverse airborne AVIRIS sensors. The core of SpecAware is a two-step hypernetwork-driven encoding process for HSI data. Firstly, we designed a meta-content aware module to generate a unique conditional input for each HSI patch, tailored to each spectral band of every sample by fusing the sensor meta-attributes and its own image content. Secondly, we designed the HyperEmbedding module, where a sample-conditioned hypernetwork dynamically generates a pair of matrix factors for channel-wise encoding, consisting of adaptive spatial pattern extraction and latent semantic feature re-projection. Thus, SpecAware gains the ability to perceive and interpret spatial-spectral features across diverse scenes and sensors. This, in turn, allows SpecAware to adaptively process a variable number of spectral channels, establishing a unified framework for joint pre-training. Extensive experiments on six datasets demonstrate that SpecAware can learn superior feature representations, excelling in land-cover semantic segmentation classification, change detection, and scene classification.